For those of you who don't work in the pharmaceutical industry, what this, and indeed for those
of you do, this diagram in front of you is essentially an org chart and it's also a timeline.
So this is how the biostatistics department at GSK is structured. I say it's like a timeline
because our structure essentially reflects the drug development life cycle. So this can
take up to 15 years, which is what this arrow at the bottom is presenting, and that takes
us through the research in vivo in vitro analysis all the way through to the clinical development.
And by and large, if you're not from industry or you are and that's familiar to you, you
can slice this up into two distinct ways of working really. The first is the sort of non-clinical
area, and that's actually where my group, Cisco Data Sciences, sits, but it's also where
our research statistics and our manufacturing statistics groups sit as well. And that's
a large group of statisticians, programmers, data scientists, around about 100 people.
But overwhelmingly, the vast majority of people in that group sit within the clinical space.
And the clinical space has very, very different controls and ways of working to the non-clinical
space. And it's the clinical space that we're going to be talking about today. So a team
of 500 clinical data scientists, that we're going to call them. And I put data scientists
in quotes on this slide because, really, if you speak to anyone in that department, very
few people would actually call themselves a data scientist. They are made up of people
whose job title is either statistician or programmer, generally.
And one of the reasons why I think that I would also probably not call them data scientists
in a sense is that, for me, a data scientist is someone who is multi-skilled in a number
of different ways. So they're not simply a statistician. They can code a bit as well.
They can use different languages. They use the right tool for the job. And although there's
a huge amount of talent in that 500 statisticians or programmers, at the start of our journey,
they weren't really data scientists in the sense that I'm describing.
Just to give you an idea of what kinds of skills we do have, away from just pure statistics
and pure programming skill, I put up some proficiency, some rough estimates of proficiency
within the department at the start of this journey in 2018. And as you can see, the overwhelming
majority can program in SAS. I've said 99%. I put 100%. But I'm allowing myself a little
bit of room for one or two people who can't. But essentially, everybody can program in
SAS.
There is some proficiency in R in the clinical space. But largely, R has been used historically
for the generation of graphics. And SAS still dominates in that area. It's normally bespoke
graphics that are particularly difficult to generate in SAS that R has been used for,
along with a few very proactive R users pushing R for graphics, and for clinical trial simulations
where R arguably lends itself better towards simulations. Python, again, I've tried to
cover myself with 1%. Essentially, nobody's using Python in this clinical space. But just
in case, I put 1% there. And Julia, essentially, I've put up there to make it sound like I
know what I'm talking about. Essentially, no one is using that either.
So why are we not using R? Well, a lot of it comes down to the past 20 or 30 years of
drug development. And skills have been built up over that time in SAS. And alongside those
skills, the tools we use, what are called SAS macros, which if you're not familiar with
SAS would be akin to an R function. But you can think of all the functions and packages
you might build in R. All those kind of tools that we build to make our job easier have
all been built in SAS. And in a clinical space, it's very, very heavily regulated.
And so we have systems that control, to a very fine nature, our workflows that we use.
And these systems, as well, are entirely built for SAS.
Add all that to the fact that it's very conservative. The further along you get along the pipeline,
the more conservative it gets within our industry. And you can start to see why R hasn't been
used. But the real one that I hear a lot is this statement here that regulators only accept
analyses performed in SAS. This is essentially a myth that has been around for a long time.
It gets repeated in various different forms. And I've tried to give you an idea at the bottom
of the slide as to what really that means and where that comes from, or at least where I think
it comes from. So you have, for example, when you're filing for submission with the FDA,
the Food and Drug Administration of America, you have to provide data sets in the SAS transport
format. And that's an open format. And this statement is, I'll put a link in the bottom
as to where that comes from. But this statement here is from the FDA. It's clearly an open
standard. I put a line of code, a bit of pseudocode on the right-hand side to highlight
just how easy that is to generate in R. In fact, there's less code in R than it would take in SAS,
ironically. But these kinds of things, these kinds of statements get put out there. And I
think because it has SAS in it, there's always this assumption that SAS has to be used. And
where people aren't very, very close to the submission end of things, it's easy to see
how that gets changed and transformed over time. And people get very used to this SAS-dominated
way of working. On the regulatory note, I could talk for an entire hour. I won't be,
but I could talk for an entire hour on this topic that Phil mentioned in the introduction.
If you are interested in the regulatory barriers or perceived regulatory barriers that we face in
the pharmaceutical space, I would recommend you go to www.pharmaR.org. This is the R validation
hub that Phil mentioned. And you can see here, in particular, our white paper on a risk-based
approach to package validation. So given all those barriers and challenges, why are we looking
at R now? I think one of the key reasons is the influx of new talent and skill around R coming
from college, from university. And we may have people who have been using SAS for 20 or 30 years.
But with this new people coming in with skills in R, generally, they're not coming out with skills
in SAS. And what we're doing is, because no one else understands R very well, we're having to
retrain them. All their education has been in R. And we're retraining them in SAS to make them
so that they can work with everybody else. And now, I think it's probably fair to say
that we've reached critical mass. We've got so many people who know what to use R that we're
now looking at it the other way around. Let's retrain some of the people that have been there
for 20 or 30 years in R. The other piece is the drive for innovation. And that's not new.
We're always driving for innovation. But I think there's a few things, in particular, that I've
highlighted on this slide. The last two, the communication and visualization and the productivity
gains that I mentioned, I'll go through in a bit more detail in the next slide. For now, just to
talk about the methodologies and simulation, what we're seeing is an increased drive to
use the latest statistical methodologies to try and design more efficient trials. And when I talk
about more efficient trials, what I mean is, if you think about a drug getting to market, up until
the point where you have proved the efficacy and the safety of that drug, your drug is something
that you want to expose as few people to as possible. It's a potentially dangerous compound
that we want to make sure that we're minimizing that exposure. So we need to reduce that. And
equally, if it is effective and it's safe, we want to get it to market as quickly as possible.
And there's been a lot of investment in things like placebo reuse of data, BSK, and other
methodologies to try and create a more streamlined process for developing drugs. And a lot of that
requires heavy amounts of simulation. And there are a lot of tools that have been built around
that that are available in R. So they're really, really pushing things forward as well.
Before I move on to the last two and I talk about visualization and the dynamic reporting aspect,
I just want to mention a couple of others that often get talked about in relation to
adoption of R. The first one being cost. I think cost is important in certain sectors.
I wouldn't put it as important as any of the other things on this slide, actually.
When you think about cost, yes, R is free and tools like SAS are not. But there's a huge cost
in training 500 people and updating all of our standard tools and systems and so on as well.
So in a sense that the cost, yes, there's some long-term cost savings. But in the short term,
actually, it's probably the other way around. And then the last one, the gateway to Python and
open source, everything I'm talking about here with respect to R, you could switch out R and
put in Python or any other open source tool. R is being more statistical, I guess, in nature,
at least in its origins, compared to something like Python. It is a more natural language in
the pharmaceutical space to use. And that's why we've chosen it as the tool to sit alongside SAS.
But certainly, once we prove the case for R, and if you go back to that validation point,
you can prove that case for R. Why not Python? Why not Julia? Why not other languages? Once you're
in that open source space, you can start taking advantage of some of the interoperability between
these two tools. OK. So the two GSK Catholics I wanted to talk about, the first one is a shiny
use case. And this is something we call quantitative decision making at GSK. In a nutshell,
it is the probability of being able to make a decision at the end of the trial, given
the operating characteristics of the study, so the study design, and various other pieces of
information that we know up front. I don't want to talk through this in a lot of detail. Again,
this is something I have given a whole presentation on in the past. But essentially, what we try and
do with quantitative decision making at GSK is we take known values. So up in the top right-hand
corner, there's a diagram here where it talks about this is looking at treatment difference.
So on the x-axis, you've got a difference, for example, a difference between our drug and
placebo, or our drug and some competitor on the market. And in a standard clinical trial,
you might look at the difference between those two compounds. And you're going to generate some
kind of p-value. And if it's a late phase study, you might be looking for something like p less
than 0.05 to show that there is some kind of treatment difference. And that's great at the
study level. But what QDM is looking at really is the lifecycle of the compound. So in the early
phases of development, so in phase 2, where QDM is particularly used at GSK, you can't power study
sufficiently to be able to make those p less than 0.05 kinds of statements. What you want to be
able to do is, given everything you know about the drug, you want to be able to estimate
probabilities. What's the probability that the difference between our two compounds is greater
than some clinically meaningful, commercially viable difference? Now, all of this is quite
complicated. It uses a Bayesian framework. We put priors on all the information we know. There's a
lot of study design elements that we consider. And what we're trying to get to at the end is
the probability of success of the study. So the probability that we're going to be able to make a
clear decision as to whether to continue into the next phase of development or stop development of
our compound. And because it's quite complicated, when we trained a lot of our clinicians in the
methodology, they weren't immediately receptive to everything that we were saying. It's a lot
of complex mathematics when mathematics is generally not their first job. So
we developed an app. And in doing so, take all those factors, things like the sample size,
the randomization ratio, the standard deviation, things you can see on this screen here, hopefully.
And you combine that with information about the minimum value and the target value,
and potentially lots of other operating characteristics as well. And you allow
the clinicians and the clinical teams to play around with the sliders, change different options.
And then it starts to become real for them. They can start to see what the impact of the
study design is on the ultimate probability of success. And that's really led, because this is
such an important initiative at GSK, it's rolled out across all of our studies at GSK that are in
that phase of development. And because of that, we're seeing widespread adoption of QDM methodology.
Everyone is seeing the Shiny apps, and there's a huge number of requests for additional Shiny apps.
Second example, I'll go over this a little bit more briefly, is dynamic reporting. Essentially,
our submission process at the moment, or our development process, is such that we generate
summary datasets in a very old-fashioned, boring text tables format at the moment. And we generate
these in the same way we've done for 20 or 30 years. And that's fine for our submissions. But
then when we want to present those in a PowerPoint presentation, and we want to publish those results
in some other way, what we find ourselves doing is reformatting all that information.
Even, in fact, in the clinical study report, we hand over the data to our medical writing teams,
and they end up doing things like manually merging columns and reformatting some of the data that
we've given them before it goes to the clinical study report. So you could use, if you weren't
using Microsoft products, something like R Markdown would be equally suitable for this. We actually
used the Officer package to prove this concept last year, that we could just take the summary
datasets that we generate in Biostatistics and automatically place all of the outputs into
each of these different formats without the need for huge amounts of transcription QC,
which is what takes place today. So I hope that's given you a bit of an introduction.
And a couple of things that we're looking at that are really accelerating the adoption of R
within GSK. What I want to move on to now is generally how we're trying to build this
capability. So I guess some of the marketing, some of the advertising that we've done internally to
promote R. And in building capability, I've put out something here which will probably horrify
anyone working in change management, but what I'm calling a simple recipe for
building capability. Because the components here, the ingredients, if you like, in this recipe
are not rocket science. It's more about how you do it. And that's what we'll talk about in the
rest of this webinar. So Tilo's going to talk about the environment that we've built, about
warp environment. And Michael will talk about the way that we're promoting on-the-job learning
through an initiative called R4QC. Before I move on to training, I just want to highlight as well
that given this is a heavily regulated industry, processes and standards also plays a big part. We
actually have standard operating procedures that effectively reference SAS directly. Not intentionally,
but our workflows are so built around the SAS workflow that certain elements that don't even
make sense for R. And of course, marketing that I've mentioned. So let's move on, look at training
before I hand over to Tilo to talk you through the warp environment. What you can see on the
slide now, which is a build slide, is three prongs of how we talk about data science within biostatistics.
And this is largely based around our traditional roles. So at the top, we talk about modeling. And
modeling is the role that's traditionally performed by a statistician in GSK biostatistics.
And a programmer would fulfill a data wrangling role within biostatics. The role that my team
fulfills in promoting R is more of an engineering role. And engineering can mean lots of different
things to lots of different people. What we mean in this space is things like building the
environment, building applications, building R packages. So if you like the tooling that goes
that helps support data science analyses. And the way we've gone about training everybody
is to focus on the tidyverse and focus on ggplot2. So I've written these two things. ggplot2 is
clearly part of the tidyverse. The reason I've separated them out in this diagram is because
they are two separate face-to-face courses that we created, which are now virtual courses
for everyone in biostatistics. And we want to make sure that everyone's got to a base level
in tidyverse before we move on. We chose tidyverse because of all of the reasons you would
normally choose tidyverse. So things like the simplicity of the functions, the consistency,
and so on. But also because if you're trying to take people who know SAS and train them in R,
R is a lot more expansive than SAS. It's a language. You have things like matrices and
lists and so on. And can get quite complicated when you get into it. SAS, on the other hand,
is built around very simple flows, built around data steps. So we call data steps in SAS.
And the way that that works is very, very similar to the way that the tidyverse is built around
data frames or tibbles in the tidyverse vernacular. So that makes it a lot easier for someone coming
across from SAS to R to pick up tibbles and pick up that way of working than it does.
And in particular, the Magritte pipe and everything like that is very familiar to
people coming from a SAS background. So we build them up in the foundations. And then in each of
the core areas, we then look to strengthen core competencies. So we have bespoke training
in various different forms. I put in the right-hand side some of the methods of delivery.
So this will not all be face-to-face training. Lots of this is guidebooks, webinars, all sorts
of different things that we do to promote the learning. And there'll be core stats training
using real GSK data in programming. ProgPlus here represents sort of more targeted training
in things like Stringer, Lubudate, those kind of packages for more advanced data manipulation.
And then we look at things like function writing from an engineering perspective.
And then when the value comes in, it's around these kinds of things. So Shiny clearly plays
a big part of our future. So we've got some expansive targets around building Shiny capability.
Publishing here, I'm using to refer to things like Officer, as well as R Markdown, Bookdown,
Blogdown, those kinds of tools as well. And you can see that through this, we're building
capabilities in each direction across the group. OK. In this particular section, what I'm going
to focus on is the environment that we've built to support statisticians, programmers, and data
scientists within biostatistics, and increasingly now beyond biostatistics as well. We call this
environment WARP because it's part of a wider initiative called SPACE. And if you want to make
that into an acronym, we sometimes talk about the working area for our programming. OK.
So as has been mentioned in the introduction, the majority of our users are clinical users,
statisticians, and programmers. And the kind of data they work with, clinical trial data,
is relatively small in the data science space. So a few hundred subjects visiting a clinic,
a handful of times, maybe less than 10 times, generating at most in some of our laboratory
data sets a few megabytes of data. Certainly not generally in the gigabyte terms.
And the kind of analyses that we're running are standard statistical models, linear models,
generalized linear models, mixed models, cross-proportional hazards, these kinds of things.
And when we simulate that data, what we have is computationally demanding simulations where we
fit that model over and over again, as opposed to needing to work with very, very large data
sources and trying to solve problems with memory and so on. The only exception to that is that we
are seeing increasing use of molecular and genomics data as well. And that's something
that we'll have to adapt to and respond to in the future. So in terms of what that means our
environment needs to cover, well, we need an interactive environment at its core. And I'll
talk through each of these components in the next few slides separately. We need a high performance
capability to support those simulations that I mentioned. And with respect to our new
capabilities, our shiny apps and our markdown-based
workflows, we need an ability to share that kind of content.
And of course, to do anything, we need access to all of our data sources.
We've provided this through a centralized environment. That probably isn't a surprise
to anyone who works in this industry. But our aim is to get people off desktops where we can
and provide a level of consistency. Particularly in the clinical setting,
we need consistency, traceability, transparency in what we do. And we have a large number of
users that we need to support when doing this. So we have capacity at the moment for around about
1,000 data scientists with 300 concurrent users, we estimate.
This diagram is just to highlight some of the technologies that are included in this environment.
You'll see as well as R, you'll see technologies like Python and Stan mentioned. Generally,
we access those through R as opposed to direct access through their own
IDEs. So everything is built around RStudio Server Pro, and it's very much designed as an
R-based environment. All of those other components there are really just
supporting the use of R. So even take something like Git and GitHub,
that's actually maintained completely separately, but we'll provide a connection
in R to allow our code to be stored and managed through GitHub.
So we've chosen RStudio Server Pro. And again, maybe this is an obvious choice for many people,
but clearly the RStudio IDE is the standard IDE for R anyway. But increasingly in the data
science space, I do see a sort of a trend towards more notebook-like environments,
but really in a clinical space, that doesn't work. We work with scripts primarily. And for those
users coming across from SAS, all they've ever known really is scripts. So first and foremost,
we need an environment to be able to develop and execute scripts. And RStudio Server Pro is really
nice in that it provides, well, the RStudio IDE generally provides notebook access and
obviously easy use of our markdown if you want it, and therefore is the best of both.
But it also provides the ability to load balance. So for us with a high number of users,
we actually have two servers with RStudio Server Pro running. And users will log onto a single
address, and they'll be put onto whichever server has the most capacity. And this is also really,
really useful for things like maintenance to minimize the downtime that users experience as
well. There are some challenges with the interactive environment, the load balancing
with respect to high-performance usage, but I'll come onto that after the next slide.
So in this slide, what I want to talk about is our means to manage such an environment. So
for a regulatory environment, I suppose at the moment we are quite open. So we're not
locking much down for our users. First and foremost, we need to get people off laptops
with R. And on a laptop, they're used to high levels of flexibility. So we provide a central
installation of R, and that installation is updated every six months. So we have many,
many versions of R, and all of the recent versions are exposed to users. So for every six months,
over a period of three years, you can go back and select a version of R that you want to use.
And when we talk about a version of R, we don't just mean the core and recommended packages.
To date, we currently have around 450 packages centrally installed in a system library as well.
So when a new user logs onto the system, they get access to Tidyverse and other popular packages
for our kind of work immediately. They don't have to go and install those packages. And moreover,
because these are centrally installed in the system library, everyone has the same version
of those packages, which ensures a degree of stability and usage. We do allow flexibility,
so users can install their own packages as well in their own personal user library. We're not
restricting that at the moment, but it's very likely that we'll supplement this environment
in the future with more static, stable versions of R that are a bit more locked down. The only
element of control that we really have on the environment is provided through RStudio Package
Manager. So RStudio Package Manager provides access to packages that users would typically
go and install from CRAN, Bioconductor, GitHub, and so on. And with respect to CRAN and Bioconductor,
we pretty much provide the whole of CRAN, or we do provide the whole of CRAN and Bioconductor.
For GitHub, users would have to request that particular repositories are added to our
environment before they can install it. So they can't directly access CRAN, Bioconductor, or
GitHub, or anywhere else. And we also have our own GitHub enterprise, the GSK, as well, which we
release packages onto, and users can use RStudio Package Manager to access those.
What's actually really, really nice about RStudio Package Manager is that it allows us to monitor
the downloads. And so when we see users installing, many users installing the same package,
what we can then do is to install that in the central system library in a future release.
Again, just to limit the amount of personalization and customization that might affect
the transferability of our code. And speaking of central monitoring, another really nice feature
that our admin support team use quite extensively is the admin screens that are available
through RStudio, through RStudio Server Pro. So here you can see a view of our system.
What I haven't mentioned thus far is that the system, these two servers that we use are very,
very powerful servers. They're originally intended for high-performance computing,
so they each have 192 cores and three terabytes of RAM, which is why you can see sort of 1%
CPU memory usage on here. So generally, we are not pushing these servers to their limits.
What you can see, though, is these little spikes that occur here. And these spikes occur when a
user tries to paralyze or does successfully paralyze code and executes that in the background.
So we can monitor the system, see these spikes, and then talk to those users. Users are permitted
to generate, you know, they are allowed to paralyze code and they are allowed to practice
HPC runs, but our expectation is that they run them on a separate HPC system, which I'll talk
through next. So that system is fully accessible from our RStudio Server Pro environment.
So we built an add-in to access Slurm, which is the tool that we use for accessing HPC.
So you can see on here, each one of these is a different server. So when the users in RStudio
Server Pro access that add-in, the information they enter there essentially writes the necessary
script to launch that job on to two separate HPC nodes. Again, all of these nodes, every single
one of these servers in this diagram has 193 terabytes of memory, which is far too much for
our management node. It doesn't need anything like that. And no doubt, we'll change that in
the future. But certainly for the HPC, that means we've got some very powerful servers available.
One point to note, I mentioned that we built an add-in for this. We were sort of bleeding edge
when we were doing this and the functionality wasn't readily available in RStudio.
I understand that it is available now. You can use Launcher within RStudio to work with Slurm as
well as Kubernetes. But until GSK migrates to start using Kubernetes, we are still using our
own custom add-in at this moment in time. So beyond the obvious, I just want to now highlight
the value add, I guess, of this environment. So the new things that we can do now that we
couldn't already do in our SAS-based environments. And for content sharing, so for sharing
Shiny apps, RMarkdown documents, Bookdown, Blogdown, we use RStudio Connect.
We have one server at the moment running RStudio Connect. In the future, again, that might be two.
So we might evolve to have a development and production server. But at the moment,
it's all in one and it's a pretty liberal model. So users can publish anything they like. So you
see a lot of apps, development apps with the word test next to them. Primarily, I'd say the Shiny
apps are, I mean, the Shiny apps are a mixed bag. We get all sorts of QDM, quantitative decision
making app that I mentioned earlier. We get various dashboards that people have created,
training apps, and so on. The image in the left-hand side is taken from a proof of concept
we did to use Shiny to report clinical trial data. So we've got an ongoing initiative at the moment
where we're looking at replacing a lot of our standard outputs with a Shiny app. And there's
a lot of questions that come with that around things like data access and what to do if we
find anything in there when we're exploring the data, how do we report that and so on.
So there's a lot of questions of that, but we're starting to explore Shiny for that as well.
Otherwise, we also use RStudio Connect for all of our training materials. So most of those are
produced using Bookdown and we host those on Connect. One particular feature I want to highlight
that isn't mentioned on this slide, but is something that I really, I'm really, really
thrilled about is there's a feature in RStudio Connect that allows you to publish directly from
Git. So we use Git and GitHub extensively, particularly within my team. And you can
point RStudio Connect directly at a particular branch on GitHub. So for example, we'd have our
production apps pointing at the master branch and we'll have a test branch where we would
point RStudio Connect at for more regular updates and testing. And that's a really,
really nice feature that often doesn't get talked about that I just wanted to highlight.
Otherwise, I think RStudio Connect generally works really, really well for us. The only
bit of guidance that we often need to work with our users on is around data access. So
sometimes people don't understand how RStudio Connect runs. So you can basically configure it
to run as you as the user that's trying to access that content, or you can configure it to run as a
generic user. And that affects things like data access. And so we're often having to work with
users to explain that. Equally, you can configure, you can design an app such that the data is
deployed as part of the app, or you can write apps to access external data sources where
some of what I just mentioned becomes more of an issue. But there's lots of different mechanisms
for controlling access within Connect. And that's one of the key advantages, I think,
that we see for it for Shiny apps, is making sure that the right people see the right content.
Just before I round off, I just wanted to mention some of the back ends. I've mentioned things like
relational databases. These are ideal for clinical trial data. Our clinical trial data is actually
stored on file shares at the moment. But in future, it'll either live on a relational database
or a graph database. So we've provided access to a number of internal file shares, and
we're able to access relational databases as well. And at the bottom of the slide is mentioned
Hadoop clusters. Outside of a sort of clinical setting, there are a number of users who want
to access things like real world data, electronic health record databases that are stored on
separate Hadoop clusters within GSK. So we provide access to those. And then the second
one down on the slide, the object store that we have. Again, something that's perhaps not talked
about too much these days, but I think we will see it a little bit more in the future, is the
concept of an object store for data. And we have some fairly large structured and unstructured
data sources that we access through the object store. And it's something that's helped us develop
our first clinical RNA sequencing pipeline, which we'll be able to announce later this year,
as well as providing a means to enable another pipeline that allowed us to
analyze COVID-19 data and respond to a demand from our clinical operations
group to try and understand what the impact of COVID-19 is going to be on clinical trial
recruitment. So there's been a couple of really nice use cases where connecting to the object
store has been particularly powerful. And we're very grateful for the work that's gone into
getting AWS S3 back onto CRAN. So I'll just finish with an overview of the whole system.
I've spoken about each of these components. The only one really to highlight that I haven't
mentioned before is this management. I haven't mentioned in any detail is this management node.
So this contains our centralized R distribution. So whether it's Connect, whether it's
Interactive Environments or HPC nodes, all of these are working off the same base
R installation, which sits on there, as well as things like our Studio Package Manager,
then to manage that, and the Slurm workload manager. So having this extra node independent
from the rest is kind of useful. It's not necessary as such to have it as a separate node.
And as I mentioned in the previous slide, it's a little bit overpowered at the moment
for what we need it for, but it's a really, really useful component, as well as the load
balancing that takes place everywhere else. And as mentioned, a future improvement will be to
balance the content across the Connect services, as well.
So with that, I will round off and hand over to Michael to talk about our on-the-job learning,
so an initiative called R4QC, in particular. Thank you very much.
Yeah, my name is Michael Rimler. I am in clinical programming within GSK Biostatistics,
and I am here to talk about our adoption story, or our adoption story, within clinical programming,
and really in the clinical reporting process. The objectives of this project really are kind
of twofold at a top level. One is driving capability. So as Andy mentioned, we have
a vast majority of our staff are historically SAS programmers, but we're moving into this
space where we want to integrate R into the clinical reporting process. And to do that,
we need that capability. We need people to be able to program in R. And although people have
developed their SAS skills over time, I've been in the industry for 10, 11 years now,
and virtually everything that I've learned in terms of SAS has been on the job,
where I had a challenge that I needed to figure out how to resolve, and I asked questions,
I looked things up, and I figured out it wasn't from sitting in classes and taking courses and
working on problem sets and things like that. And so we want to be able to build that capability.
And secondly, we want to establish an environment. And by environment, I don't mean what Tilo's
saying, environment, although that, of course, is very, very important, but really making sure
that people have the right to, the permission to engage in certain activities in the clinical
reporting process. We know what the ways of working are, things like that, so that someone
comes in and then has the tools available to them to do that as well. So someone comes in
and we hire them in, and apples to apples, they look the same as a newly hired SAS programmer,
but they happen to know R, as Andy mentioned, that this is where a lot of the folks coming out
of university are coming in with, that they can be just as productive, they don't have to
go through additional steps of learning, additional training, so that they can be productive,
they can be productive right out of the gate. Along this process, we've been asking questions
like, well, why are we doing this? What's the role of R versus SAS in our future? And to Andy's point,
that also brings into account more open source, but here we're focusing on R. So what is the
role of R versus SAS? Now, my perspective in leading this project, and I feel like I have
the support of our senior management, is that it's integrating R and SAS. It's not about flipping a
switch and doing R or SAS, it's about how do we integrate this into our processes? How are we
doing this? What are the elements that are needed to declare our teams to be R-ready? And what's
next? So SAS has a certain amount of capabilities, other languages have certain things that they
excel at, but the fact that we're trying to integrate R into our processes, does that open
up the door for our department to be delivering other things to our quote-unquote customers
beyond our conventional data sets, tables, listings, and figures? This started with a project
that was called R for QC, where we wanted to look at using R for the QC process. So for those that
are unfamiliar with a somewhat conventional QC process within clinical reporting, you have a
production-side programmer who creates the output, they create the data set, they create the table,
that sort of thing. And then someone else, an independent programmer, independently creates code
using the same inputs, but then a different process, because independently generated. And if
they get the same outcome at the end, then that satisfies a significant level of the requirements
from a validation perspective. And so that's what we were looking at when the R for QC project,
in parts one and two, we focused on displays, just looking at, not looking at data sets,
and it was more of a proof of feasibility, proof of concept type model. We only did about nine
displays in part one, and then we expanded the team and expanded, and actually in part two, we
were able to replicate or doubly validate and compare to the production-side SAS-generated
displays using R as opposed to SAS. It was about 150-some displays that were in that proof of
concept. That opened the door for our part three, where we sort of go live, which was one of our
initial objectives, which is, how do we open the door for all of our staff to be able to use R as
opposed to SAS for something? Because that allows them to take any training that Andy's group is
providing and use it on the job, so that they can immediately go out and do their normal,
everyday work, but start to do it in the language of R as opposed to the language of SAS.
And so we had a number of components, which I'll go through in order to get endorsement
for being able to do that, but we are now, our part three has now been ongoing for about four
or five months now, and we continue to bring more and more people into the fold. At the same time,
or roughly around the same time, we launched into part four, which is a proof of concept that moves
us into the datasets and atom dataset mapping. These two projects now have become under the
umbrella of a sort of new and broader initiative within clinical programming on R adoption.
And there, I was sort of tasked with, what's the roadmap to R then look like for clinical
programming? What do we need to do to get to the point where we are using R as much as we are SAS,
or at least they're sort of interchangeable, or we have a strategic direction, that sort of thing.
And before I could figure out a roadmap, which is when are you going to do things,
I didn't know what we're going to do. What are the components of broad adoption of R
within the department? And that created these sort of six or seven work streams,
which included the R for QC remaining elements of part three and part four,
but looked at things like central tools. So in the SAS world, in the SAS workflow, we have,
and many organizations do, right? We have our SAS macro library suite that people use.
We don't have the same thing in R. There's packages out there. Those packages are not
written for the clinical data pipeline, but they do have functionality. So what can we do
to make the ability for uptake of our SAS programmers moving into R easier? Because
we're not asking them to program for first principles. We give them a set of tools that
allows them to do that. And Andy's group on that engineering side that he was talking about,
and his group provided those initial packages that we've been using through the R for QC project.
There's also a work stream on, of course, training and support for our staff. It's a
massive organization, and this is a big change in terms of the way we do our work. So there's
a change management and a communications piece to this. There's outreach. That's outreach.
We're really driving this within the clinical program department, but there's outreach outside
of clinical programming still within Biostats and still within GSK, but also external outreach.
For example, this type of platform where we're sharing our knowledge and our experience. We're
not the first ones to go through this, but we are carving our own path, and we do have different
experiences. And the more that we share, the more that we can pull the rest of the industry
along with us, along with the folks like Genentech and Roche and the likes of that.
And then, of course, we always are thinking about, well, we're doing this on the QC set of things.
What does it mean to get R onto production? Some of that falls within Andy's group. Some of that
falls within the tech group, and some of that falls within the work that we're doing, and there's
always the question out there about submission with R-generated analyses and data. So that R
for QC project, I talked about a little bit already, and Andy's also mentioned some of this
also. But why did we decide to use R in the R for QC project? We have this long-term objective
within clinical programming to become programmatically multilingual. It's not driven
by SAS license costs. Andy already mentioned the idea of recruitment. I also think that flips to
retention for the folks that have been within our group for a long time. This offers new and
exciting things that can do if you have interest in doing that. But operationally, it also gives us
flexibility, the ability to choose the right tool for the job at hand, and also an expansion of the
things that we might deliver to our internal customers. Why did we look at QC? It's a lower
risk of entry point. That's what we thought from the beginning, that QC programming tends to have
lower regulatory scrutiny. It's not typically submitted along with a submission package.
So therefore, you can have QC code developed during the reporting workflow
and in R as opposed to SAS, and it's not going to be challenged as much. And we're still producing
everything using SAS at the moment. So we're taking things that are produced in a language
and in a workflow that has been commonly accepted, and we're simply using our validation processes
using R. And as mentioned, it's going to facilitate the on-the-job organic upskilling
because we know that if I need to validate a summary of demographics, I can go and I can use
R within our RStudio environment and do that work there as opposed to launching up SAS.
Those first few parts, parts one and two on displays, and now moving into part four,
all proof of concepts, we're really thinking about demonstrating the capability of using R
for stage two QC. And GSK is referred to as independent validation as stage two QC,
and back to that facilitating the on-the-job use of R for upskilling.
We had a number of successes with that. So we had to figure out how to actually compare data frames.
We can use PROC COMPARE in SAS. How do you do that in R? There's a couple of packages that
we identified that could satisfy this, and we landed on the diffdf package.
And that has been proven successful through our experience so far to leverage that package.
We have successful cross-functional collaborations, most specifically with Andy's group.
But that was needed because we didn't have the sort of internal skill set that we needed in
knowledge, so we needed to work cross-functionally. I mentioned the central tools. It also gave us a
better vision of our roadmap towards R, and we developed a significant amount of supporting
documentation to help our staff. Challenges that we faced, and I would argue Matt, one is onboarding
into what I would call the R ecosystem. So that's the work environment, that's working with Git and
GitHub, that's thinking about having to, as a programmer, having to worry about loading packages
and installing packages and things like that. It's just different than SAS, and so how do you take
folks that have been using SAS for 3, 5, 10, 15, 20 years and say, well, now we want you to do this
in R, how do you help lower the entry cost for that so that uptake can be higher, adoption can be
stronger? PROC COMPARE and diffdf, diffdf seems to be developed and designed to be very similar
to PROC COMPARE, but it has a different look, it has a different feel, and so we had to work through
those challenges of how you use it as a diagnostic tool, not just a everything compares sort of
result. Good program practice in R is different, also trying to institute some sort of code review
culture, which is, I don't know what it's like in every organization, but it's not as strong as we
would like within GSK. I think within clinical reporting, I think that's primarily driven by
the independence of QC culture, but trying to build up a code review mentality and good
programming practice. And we also noticed, because we're comparing SAS to R results, we also noticed
that there are differences between SAS and R on some fundamental things, not that either is right
or wrong. When we noticed the differences in the compare output and we dug into it, we realized
that SAS was doing what SAS said they should be doing and R was doing what R said they should be
doing. And so how do we reconcile that from a reporting standpoint, from an analysis standpoint?
If our general concept is, well, things should match exactly, and we're not getting things
matching exactly, how do we sift through that? More importantly, how do we support our teams
in navigating that? When you open the door to let loose 250 programmers, 350 programmers to do this,
they need to know, all right, I now see this difference, what do I do about this difference?
And so we started working through those sorts of things with the SAS versus R differences that
we were encountering. That brought us to part three. Part three is where we go to live stage
two or independent QC using R instead of SAS. You could think of running it as like a pilot study
where you have a study that says, we're going to just validate everything using R. Instead of that
model, we chose to have an organic sort of grassroots effort to doing this. So any individual
programmer at the output level can say, all right, I've been assigned 25 different displays, so I'm
going to choose these three and I'm going to validate these using R instead of SAS. That's the
opportunity to use, to on the job learn R and take what you've learned from the training coming out
of Andy's group and use it for the work that you typically do. Part of the requirements of that,
we're making sure that, of course, the leadership on the study was aware of what was happening
because it doesn't put us, we don't think it puts a significant amount of risk, but it's something
from a resourcing and timelines perspective leadership needs to know about. We have mechanisms
in place to help with ways of working and also provide visibility on what's happening. But really,
it was putting in place a model of encouragement from above. So we had leadership in the team
saying, you can do this, we allow you to do this, we know it's going to take you a little bit longer
than you might be able to do it in SAS because you're so fluent in SAS and just learning R,
but we're going to provide all this support from below in terms of documentation and a support
team to answer your questions and things like that. On the right here, I'm not going to go
through them, it's just we outlined a number of required components before we would say,
it's a green light, people can go out and do this and use R. It is a regulated environment,
so we have to be conservative in this approach while we, as well as the rest of the industry,
is navigating towards the ultimate objective of sort of freely being able to submit packages
produced in using R and perhaps other open source languages. Some of the support mechanisms we have
in place, I'll run through this quickly because I know that we're running a little bit short on
time. We put together a quick start guide to just be a one-stop shop that links out to a number of
internal documentation, and we put together on the left here is a guidance document that's
pretty thorough. It goes through not just how to get started, but also what does it mean to develop
code in RStudio, how do you execute code, some mini vignettes of going through some of our
standard display templates, standard summary of AE template that's very GSK specific,
but it gives people sample code, gives things that they can copy and paste and slightly tweak.
When I was learning SAS along the way, I learned by someone pointing me to a similar type output
in a different study, and I would copy that code in, and I would start to manipulate it to make
sure that it worked for my purposes, and so I wasn't starting from a blank sheet of paper every
time I started code. So that's what we wanted to do. This document on the left, which is using the
book down package, was completely designed to try and again lower that transition cost of someone
moving from SAS into R in order to improve uptake and improve adoption. On the right here is a
workplace page where GSK uses workplace. It's a workplace page that we created
also to support staff in asking questions and communicating out and that sort of thing.
So one of the interesting characteristics of this is as we release this documentation,
we also got some notice that there's more that R can do than just our statistical analysis type
work that you can publish to this sort of documentation to RStudio Connect, and that's
just another reason to integrate R into the workflows that we have. So we move into the R
adoption journey. Motivations behind this to have this expanded tool set to expand our delivery
capabilities, upskilling things that we've sort of already talked about, but we do want to become
amongst those industry leaders and not be a follower. That's where I think Andy's group
wants to position ourselves. That's where we want to position ourselves as well. That's why we have
this sort of outreach stream, that sort of thing. Coming out of that project, deliverables, we want
already study teams for our conventional delivery. We want our package development team to enhance
our process improvement. We want to have shiny development teams for future delivery products,
and of course to have a robust support strategy. And again, we always have this eye on how do we
get to R for submission. So going back to the sort of six or seven work streams here in the R
adoption project, the real question we have is how do you manage change within a massive
organization without disrupting that delivery capability? And in order to do that, we need to
have a multifaceted approach. That's where these work streams came from, to have focused efforts
within the work stream. We have leads in place for each of these work streams that both define
the objectives and the strategy towards delivering to those objectives. But those efforts
are also integrated and coordinated because this team works together, and the people that are on
each individual team and leading those teams are trying to coordinate with the
ultimate objective of serving the R adoption objectives. So in the last minute and a half
or two minutes, I just want to do a little bit of a deep dive into the essential tools that
some of the packages that Andy's team has created to serve our teams in the clinical
reporting process. So we have two RStudio add-ins first. We have a GSK header add-in and GSK log
add-in. The GSK header just inserts through RStudio. It's an interactive way of inserting
and updating the header in our R programs. GSK log generates an execution session log.
There's another add-in, which is a fourth bullet called COPY4QC. This is an add-in that was
generated since we're developing in the warp environment, but we need the code, the QC code,
to be in our study area so it can be archived with the study. We have to be able to get it from
from one system to the other while maintaining last modified dates, while maintaining the
appropriate permissions for the systems that they live in. But we also need 350 programmers to be
able to do this in a very consistent manner. And so the best way to do that is to provide them a
tool where they hit buttons and they have less and less control, limited control, over how that
happens so we can control that process. And then we have two building blocks of actually doing the
work. So GSK table building blocks of basic summary displays and GSK data set building blocks
of data set transformations. I want to focus a little bit on the GSK log and that'll close me
out because this is something that we realized early on was a unique thing here because SAS
naturally generates an execution log. R does not do that. SAS hits an error, it keeps going. R
hits an error, it stops. But people are used to seeing logs and there's a usefulness of having
some sort of execution log because it generates a record of information that's related to that
execution. So it gets us towards that sort of GXP compliance requirements that we have.
The rationale, again, R doesn't naturally generate this information. So we want to be able to provide
minimum information to demonstrate the integrity of that execution and details to facilitate
reproduction so that if two years from now someone were to go back and look at the program and want
to show reproducibility, they could recover what the R environment looked like at the time and
should be able to reproduce it. Maybe not with the click of a button, but with a little bit of
effort you'd have the information to reset that environment. And this is a challenge or a problem
that's specific to the clinical reporting workflow. What Andy's group came up with that we helped
advise on was not intended to replicate that SAS log. The design was as an RStudio add-in,
we have elements of who, what, and when. So who ran the file, what was the file, when did it start,
when did it stop. We wanted to drop in any sort of errors and warnings. So in this case,
here's a warning that the diffdf doesn't have all values compared equal, so you can see that.
Information about the R session and information about the packages and versions available. We took
the path of least resistance, so it's really all the packages that are installed in that RStudio
instance, not just the packages that were used for the production of that program,
but we do have a sort of mini-backlog of enhancements that we want to make to this
package, including moving away from being an add-in and more of a batch execution type
implementation.